README.md, before:

# NixOS Lab Deployment (Zero-Internet Workflow)
This repository manages a 31-PC NixOS lab, optimized for network installation (Netboot) with no internet access and a master PC (`pc31`) acting as the local controller.

## Architecture
- Controller (`pc31`): `PXE/Netboot`, local `binary cache`, `Colmena` orchestration.
- Nodes (Lab PCs): 30 workstations with `Btrfs` filesystem.
- Networking: installs and updates over `LAN` only, no internet on client PCs.

## 1. First setup at school (master PC)
Bootstrap the master PC (`pc31`) from a USB installer, using temporary internet access on the first boot.

From the live USB, detect boot mode and partition accordingly:
```sh
if [ -d /sys/firmware/efi ]; then
  curl -LO https://raw.githubusercontent.com/giovantenne/nixos-lab/master/disko-uefi.nix
  sudo nix --extra-experimental-features "nix-command flakes" run github:nix-community/disko -- --mode disko ./disko-uefi.nix
else
  curl -LO https://raw.githubusercontent.com/giovantenne/nixos-lab/master/disko-bios.nix
  sudo nix --extra-experimental-features "nix-command flakes" run github:nix-community/disko -- --mode disko ./disko-bios.nix
fi
sudo nixos-install --flake github:giovantenne/nixos-lab#pc31 --no-write-lock-file --no-root-passwd
reboot
```

After the first reboot, log in as `admin` and clone the repo:
```sh
git clone https://github.com/giovantenne/nixos-lab.git ~/nixos-config
cd ~/nixos-config
```

Copy the binary cache private key (`secret-key`) into the repo folder. It is already in `.gitignore`.

Copy the admin SSH private key (`admin_id_ed25519`) to `~/.ssh/id_ed25519`:
```sh
cp admin_id_ed25519 ~/.ssh/id_ed25519
chmod 600 ~/.ssh/id_ed25519
```

## 2. Prepare the controller (pc31)
All commands below run from `~/nixos-config` on `pc31`.

Update `masterIp` at the top of `flake.nix` with the DHCP-assigned IP of `pc31`:
```sh
ip -4 addr                  # find the DHCP address
vim flake.nix               # edit masterIp on line 15
```

Rebuild pc31 to apply the new settings:
```sh
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#pc31 --no-write-lock-file
```

Build the netboot artifacts:
```sh
nix build .#nixosConfigurations.netboot.config.system.build.kernel --out-link result-kernel
nix build .#nixosConfigurations.netboot.config.system.build.netbootRamdisk --out-link result-initrd
nix build .#nixosConfigurations.netboot.config.system.build.netbootIpxeScript --out-link result-ipxe
```

Pre-build all client closures so installs work offline via the local cache:
```sh
nix build .#nixosConfigurations.pc{01..30}.config.system.build.toplevel
```

## 3. Network install (PXE/Netboot)
Remove the static IP so pixiecore uses only the DHCP address:
```sh
iface=$(ip -4 addr | awk '/10.22.9.31/{print $NF; exit}')
sudo ip addr del 10.22.9.31/24 dev "$iface"
```

Start the local services in two separate terminals:
```sh
# Terminal 1: Binary cache
./scripts/run-harmonia.sh

# Terminal 2: PXE server
CMDLINE=$(grep '^kernel ' result-ipxe/netboot.ipxe | sed 's/^kernel [^ ]* //')
sudo nix run nixpkgs#pixiecore -- boot result-kernel/bzImage result-initrd/initrd --cmdline "$CMDLINE"
```

On each client PC, enable PXE/Network boot in BIOS. The PC will boot into a NixOS ramdisk.

On the booted client, run the installer:
```sh
cd /installer/repo
./setup.sh XX
```
Where `XX` is the PC number (e.g., `./setup.sh 5` for `pc05`).

When all clients are installed, restore the static IP on pc31 (or just reboot it):
```sh
iface=$(ip -4 addr | awk '/10.22.9.31/{print $NF; exit}')
sudo ip addr add 10.22.9.31/24 dev "$iface"
```

## 4. Partitioning and Boot (Disko)
Declarative configs are in `disko-bios.nix` and `disko-uefi.nix`. The `setup.sh` script auto-detects boot mode (UEFI or BIOS) and picks the right one.

GRUB is configured to support both BIOS and UEFI (`efiSupport` + `efiInstallAsRemovable`). On UEFI machines, disko creates an ESP partition mounted at `/boot`; on BIOS machines this mount is silently skipped (`nofail`).

Target disk: `/dev/sda` with Btrfs label `nixos` and subvolumes:
- `@root` -> `/`
- `@home-informatica` -> `/home/informatica`
- `@snapshots` -> `/var/lib/home-snapshots`

## 5. Home Reset and Snapshots
The `informatica` home directory resets to a clean template on every boot:

- **Template**: generated at activation time with git config, VS Code settings, and XDG directories
- **Snapshots**: last 5 versions saved in `/var/lib/home-snapshots/` (root only)

To recover student work from a previous session:
```sh
sudo ls /var/lib/home-snapshots/snapshot-1/
sudo cp /var/lib/home-snapshots/snapshot-1/file.txt /home/informatica/
```

## 6. VS Code Extensions
Extensions are bundled directly into the VS Code package at build time (no internet needed on clients). To add or remove extensions, edit the `labVscode` definition in `modules/common.nix`:
```nix
labVscode = pkgs.vscode-with-extensions.override {
  vscodeExtensions = with pkgs.vscode-extensions; [
    redhat.java
    vscjava.vscode-java-debug
    vscjava.vscode-java-test
    vscjava.vscode-maven
    vscjava.vscode-java-dependency
    ritwickdey.liveserver
    # add new extensions here
  ];
};
```
Available extensions are listed in [nixpkgs vscode-extensions](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tree/master/pkgs/applications/editors/vscode/extensions).

## 7. Post-install management (Colmena)
The master (`pc31`) pushes updates to all lab PCs via SSH:

```sh
# Start the binary cache (required for client builds)
./scripts/run-harmonia.sh

# Deploy to all lab PCs
colmena apply --on @lab

# Deploy to a single PC
colmena apply --on pc05
```

## 8. Manual rebuild
To manually rebuild a single PC from the latest GitHub config:
```sh
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake github:giovantenne/nixos-lab#pc31 --no-write-lock-file --refresh
```
Replace `pc31` with the appropriate hostname (e.g., `pc01`, `pc15`).

Commit message:

Simplify to UEFI-only boot support

README.md, after:

# NixOS Lab Deployment (Zero-Internet Workflow)
This repository manages a 31-PC NixOS lab, optimized for network installation (Netboot) with no internet access and a master PC (`pc31`) acting as the local controller.

## Architecture
- Controller (`pc31`): `PXE/Netboot`, local `binary cache`, `Colmena` orchestration.
- Nodes (Lab PCs): 30 workstations with `Btrfs` filesystem.
- Networking: installs and updates over `LAN` only, no internet on client PCs.

## 1. First setup at school (master PC)
Bootstrap the master PC (`pc31`) from a USB installer, using temporary internet access on the first boot. **UEFI boot is required** — enable it in BIOS settings if needed.

From the live USB, partition and install:
```sh
curl -LO https://raw.githubusercontent.com/giovantenne/nixos-lab/master/disko-uefi.nix
sudo nix --extra-experimental-features "nix-command flakes" run github:nix-community/disko -- --mode disko ./disko-uefi.nix
sudo nixos-install --flake github:giovantenne/nixos-lab#pc31 --no-write-lock-file --no-root-passwd
reboot
```

After the first reboot, log in as `admin` and clone the repo:
```sh
git clone https://github.com/giovantenne/nixos-lab.git ~/nixos-config
cd ~/nixos-config
```

Copy the binary cache private key (`secret-key`) into the repo folder. It is already in `.gitignore`.

Copy the admin SSH private key (`admin_id_ed25519`) to `~/.ssh/id_ed25519`:
```sh
cp admin_id_ed25519 ~/.ssh/id_ed25519
chmod 600 ~/.ssh/id_ed25519
```

## 2. Prepare the controller (pc31)
All commands below run from `~/nixos-config` on `pc31`.

Update `masterIp` at the top of `flake.nix` with the DHCP-assigned IP of `pc31`:
```sh
ip -4 addr                  # find the DHCP address
vim flake.nix               # edit masterIp on line 15
```

Rebuild pc31 to apply the new settings:
```sh
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#pc31 --no-write-lock-file
```

Build the netboot artifacts:
```sh
nix build .#nixosConfigurations.netboot.config.system.build.kernel --out-link result-kernel
nix build .#nixosConfigurations.netboot.config.system.build.netbootRamdisk --out-link result-initrd
nix build .#nixosConfigurations.netboot.config.system.build.netbootIpxeScript --out-link result-ipxe
```

Pre-build all client closures so installs work offline via the local cache:
```sh
nix build .#nixosConfigurations.pc{01..30}.config.system.build.toplevel
```

## 3. Network install (PXE/Netboot)
Remove the static IP so pixiecore uses only the DHCP address:
```sh
iface=$(ip -4 addr | awk '/10.22.9.31/{print $NF; exit}')
sudo ip addr del 10.22.9.31/24 dev "$iface"
```

Start the local services in two separate terminals:
```sh
# Terminal 1: Binary cache
./scripts/run-harmonia.sh

# Terminal 2: PXE server
CMDLINE=$(grep '^kernel ' result-ipxe/netboot.ipxe | sed 's/^kernel [^ ]* //')
sudo nix run nixpkgs#pixiecore -- boot result-kernel/bzImage result-initrd/initrd --cmdline "$CMDLINE"
```

On each client PC, enable PXE/Network boot in BIOS. The PC will boot into a NixOS ramdisk.

On the booted client, run the installer:
```sh
cd /installer/repo
./setup.sh XX
```
Where `XX` is the PC number (e.g., `./setup.sh 5` for `pc05`).

When all clients are installed, restore the static IP on pc31 (or just reboot it):
```sh
iface=$(ip -4 addr | awk '/10.22.9.31/{print $NF; exit}')
sudo ip addr add 10.22.9.31/24 dev "$iface"
```

## 4. Partitioning and Boot (Disko)
Declarative disk config is in `disko-uefi.nix`. All machines must boot in **UEFI mode**.

GRUB installs to the ESP as removable (`efiInstallAsRemovable`), which works on any UEFI machine without modifying NVRAM.

Target disk: `/dev/sda` with Btrfs label `nixos` and subvolumes:
- `@root` -> `/`
- `@home-informatica` -> `/home/informatica`
- `@snapshots` -> `/var/lib/home-snapshots`

## 5. Home Reset and Snapshots
The `informatica` home directory resets to a clean template on every boot:

- **Template**: generated at activation time with git config, VS Code settings, and XDG directories
- **Snapshots**: last 5 versions saved in `/var/lib/home-snapshots/` (root only)

To recover student work from a previous session:
```sh
sudo ls /var/lib/home-snapshots/snapshot-1/
sudo cp /var/lib/home-snapshots/snapshot-1/file.txt /home/informatica/
```

## 6. VS Code Extensions
Extensions are bundled directly into the VS Code package at build time (no internet needed on clients). To add or remove extensions, edit the `labVscode` definition in `modules/common.nix`:
```nix
labVscode = pkgs.vscode-with-extensions.override {
  vscodeExtensions = with pkgs.vscode-extensions; [
    redhat.java
    vscjava.vscode-java-debug
    vscjava.vscode-java-test
    vscjava.vscode-maven
    vscjava.vscode-java-dependency
    ritwickdey.liveserver
    # add new extensions here
  ];
};
```
Available extensions are listed in [nixpkgs vscode-extensions](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tree/master/pkgs/applications/editors/vscode/extensions).

## 7. Post-install management (Colmena)
The master (`pc31`) pushes updates to all lab PCs via SSH:

```sh
# Start the binary cache (required for client builds)
./scripts/run-harmonia.sh

# Deploy to all lab PCs
colmena apply --on @lab

# Deploy to a single PC
colmena apply --on pc05
```

## 8. Manual rebuild
To manually rebuild a single PC from the latest GitHub config:
```sh
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake github:giovantenne/nixos-lab#pc31 --no-write-lock-file --refresh
```
Replace `pc31` with the appropriate hostname (e.g., `pc01`, `pc15`).
